; Generated by scripts/build_civilopedia_text.py -- do not edit by hand.
; Source prose: docs/CIVILOPEDIA-TEXT.md
@@ADVANCE_INDEX
0,Advanced Flight
1,Alphabet
2,Amphibious Warfare
3,Astronomy
4,Atomic Theory
5,Automobile
6,Banking
7,Bridge Building
8,Bronze Working
9,Ceremonial Burial
10,Chemistry
11,Chivalry
12,Code of Laws
13,Combined Arms
14,Combustion
15,Communism
16,Computers
17,Conscription
18,Construction
19,Currency
20,Democracy
21,Economics
22,Electricity
23,Electronics
24,Engineering
25,Environmentalism
26,Espionage
27,Explosives
28,Feudalism
29,Flight
30,Fundamentalism
31,Fusion Power
32,Genetic Engineering
33,Guerilla Warfare
34,Gunpowder
35,Horseback Riding
36,Industrialization
37,Invention
38,Iron Working
39,Labor Union
40,Laser
41,Leadership
42,Literacy
43,Machine Tools
44,Magnetism
45,Map Making
46,Masonry
47,Mass Production
48,Mathematics
49,Medicine
50,Metallurgy
51,Miniaturization
52,Mobile Warfare
53,Monarchy
54,Monotheism
55,Mysticism
56,Navigation
57,Nuclear Fission
58,Nuclear Power
59,Philosophy
60,Physics
61,Plastics
62,Polytheism
63,Pottery
64,Radio
65,Railroad
66,Recycling
67,Refining
68,Refrigeration
69,Robotics
70,Rocketry
71,Sanitation
72,Seafaring
73,Space Flight
74,Stealth
75,Steam Engine
76,Steel
77,Superconductors
78,Tactics
79,The Corporation
80,The Republic
81,The Wheel
82,Theology
83,Theory of Gravity
84,Trade
85,University
86,Warrior Code
87,Writing
-2
@@Advanced Flight
Advanced Flight turns basic aviation into strategic air power. Bombers let you strike hard at distant targets while Carriers project aircraft far beyond friendly shorelines, making this advance a major step toward global combined-arms warfare.

@@Alphabet
Alphabet is one of the foundational discoveries of civilization. It opens the path to law, writing, mathematics, and seafaring knowledge, so an early investment here rapidly expands both your scientific options and your ability to organize a growing empire.

@@Amphibious Warfare
Amphibious Warfare makes coastlines far less secure. Marines can assault directly from the sea, while Port Facilities improve naval readiness, giving you the tools to invade defended continents without first finding a friendly beachhead.

@@Astronomy
Astronomy pushes navigation and science beyond the limits of simple observation. It unlocks Copernicus' Observatory and helps open the routes toward Navigation and Theory of Gravity, making it valuable to both scientific and maritime civilizations.

@@Atomic Theory
Atomic Theory is the crucial theoretical bridge from classical physics to nuclear science. It does not transform your empire overnight, but it puts Nuclear Fission within reach and therefore brings the nuclear age dangerously close.

@@Automobile
Automobile accelerates both commerce and heavy warfare. Super Highways turn developed cities into stronger trade centers, Battleships deliver immense naval firepower, and the advance opens the road toward Mass Production and Mobile Warfare.

@@Banking
Banking deepens the value of every productive trade city. Banks multiply the economic output created by Marketplaces and this advance is also a gateway to Democracy, Economics, and Industrialization, making it one of the most important midgame economic technologies.

@@Bridge Building
Bridge Building removes rivers as barriers to a coherent road network. Connecting both sides of river systems improves reinforcement speed, trade, settlement efficiency, and eventually leads directly toward Railroad.

@@Bronze Working
Bronze Working is an early military and civic breakthrough. It gives you the defensive Phalanx, makes the Colossus possible, and begins important branches toward Currency and Iron Working, so it supports both survival and long-term growth.

@@Ceremonial Burial
Ceremonial Burial gives young cities their first reliable tool for controlling unhappiness through Temples. It also begins the religious and governmental branches that lead toward Mysticism, Monarchy, and Polytheism.

@@Chemistry
Chemistry is a powerful enabling science rather than an immediate military prize. It leads toward Explosives and Refining, which in turn unlock faster Engineers, combustion technology, modern industry, and the infrastructure of the industrial age.

@@Chivalry
Chivalry fields Knights, fast mounted troops that can exploit weak fronts and overrun poorly defended territory. It also leads to Leadership, so researching it is the beginning of a long mounted-warfare upgrade path.

@@Code of Laws
Code of Laws makes a larger empire easier to govern. Courthouses help control corruption and waste, while the technology opens major political and economic paths including Monarchy, Republic, Literacy, and Trade.

@@Combined Arms
Combined Arms joins modern armor and advanced aviation into a single doctrine. Paratroopers can leap over front lines and Helicopters provide powerful mobile attack, giving you tools for rapid breakthroughs and attacks far behind conventional defenses.

@@Combustion
Combustion brings modern engines to war and industry. It unlocks Submarines and leads directly toward Automobile and Flight, making it a pivotal transition from the industrial era into mechanized and air warfare.

@@Communism
Communism unlocks a government built for large, centrally controlled empires, together with Police Stations and the United Nations. It is especially useful when distance and internal order are becoming serious problems, and it opens Espionage and Guerilla Warfare as new strategic tools.

@@Computers
Computers transform late-game science. Research Labs and the SETI Program can produce enormous research output, while the technology leads onward to Robotics and Space Flight, making it one of the strongest accelerators in the modern tech race.

@@Conscription
Conscription modernizes your defensive army with Riflemen. It also leads toward Tactics and Fundamentalism, so it serves as both an immediate defensive upgrade and a gateway to stronger military doctrines.

@@Construction
Construction lets cities grow and remain orderly through Aqueducts and Colosseums. It also unlocks Bridge Building and Engineering, making it a central technology for civilizations that want bigger cities and better infrastructure.

@@Currency
Currency makes trade a deliberate source of power. Marketplaces improve taxes and luxuries, while Currency leads directly to Trade and Construction, strengthening both your treasury and your cities.

@@Democracy
Democracy offers one of the strongest peacetime governments, minimizing corruption and rewarding a highly developed trade economy, though overseas warfare can create serious unhappiness. It also unlocks the Statue of Liberty and helps open Espionage, Conscription, and Recycling.

@@Economics
Economics greatly strengthens a mature commercial empire. Stock Exchanges multiply taxable wealth and Adam Smith's Trading Company can erase much of the maintenance burden from inexpensive improvements, while the technology leads to The Corporation.

@@Electricity
Electricity is a major gateway into the modern era. It unlocks Destroyers and leads to Electronics, Radio, Refrigeration, and Steel, but it also ends the Great Library's free-technology benefit, so reaching it can change the balance of a science strategy.

@@Electronics
Electronics turns electricity into large-scale industrial power. Hydro Plants and Hoover Dam can dramatically improve production without the dirtier profile of conventional power, while the technology opens several advanced military and scientific branches.

@@Engineering
Engineering strengthens both infrastructure and production. It unlocks King Richard's Crusade and leads toward Invention and Sanitation, helping turn a medieval empire into one capable of rapid technological and urban development.

@@Environmentalism
Environmentalism gives highly industrialized civilizations a cleaner way to keep producing. Solar Plants help reduce the pollution cost of enormous industrial output, making this technology especially useful to large late-game cities.

@@Espionage
Espionage upgrades diplomacy into professional intelligence warfare. Spies are faster and more capable than Diplomats, giving you a powerful way to steal technology, sabotage rivals, investigate cities, bribe units, and manipulate enemy plans without a conventional battle.

@@Explosives
Explosives revolutionizes terrain development by unlocking Engineers. Their greater speed and work rate let you build roads, railroads, irrigation, mines, fortifications, and pollution cleanup far faster, which can transform both your economy and your military logistics.

@@Feudalism
Feudalism improves defense with Pikemen and makes Sun Tzu's War Academy available. It also opens the paths to Chivalry and Theology, so it is a strong bridge from early government into specialized medieval military power.

@@Flight
Flight brings true air warfare to the map through Fighters. Air power can respond rapidly across huge distances and challenge naval or land forces in ways older armies cannot, although discovering Flight also makes the Colossus obsolete.

@@Fundamentalism
Fundamentalism unlocks a highly militarized government and inexpensive Fanatics. It favors conquest by supporting large armies and strong internal order at the cost of scientific efficiency, making it ideal when the priority is winning wars rather than maximizing research.

@@Fusion Power
Fusion Power is the culmination of the late nuclear-energy branch. Even without rhYciv's intentionally omitted space-race victory, reaching it demonstrates complete mastery of one of the most demanding scientific paths in the game.

@@Genetic Engineering
Genetic Engineering turns advanced medicine into an empire-wide morale advantage through the Cure for Cancer. It is a late-game happiness technology that can make enormous, crowded civilizations easier to keep productive and stable.

@@Guerilla Warfare
Guerilla Warfare unlocks Partisans, tough irregular troops that can slip through enemy zones of control and fight effectively in contested territory. It is excellent for resistance, raiding, and making an occupied frontier expensive for an enemy to hold.

@@Gunpowder
Gunpowder makes ancient armor and formations increasingly obsolete. Musketeers provide durable gunpowder infantry, while the technology leads toward Explosives, Metallurgy, and Leadership, setting up the transition to industrial warfare.

@@Horseback Riding
Horseback Riding gives early armies real operational mobility through Horsemen. It also begins the mounted branches leading to the Wheel, Chivalry, and Polytheism, making it a flexible first step for expansionist civilizations.

@@Industrialization
Industrialization changes the scale of your civilization. Factories multiply production, Transports make overseas warfare practical, and Women's Suffrage helps democratic and republican powers sustain armies; the technology also opens several key modern economic and military branches.

@@Invention
Invention is a broad technological springboard. Leonardo's Workshop can modernize obsolete forces automatically, while Invention leads toward Gunpowder, Democracy, and Steam Engine, making it one of the most strategically connected advances in the tree.

@@Iron Working
Iron Working gives you the Legion, one of the first genuinely dangerous assault units. It also leads toward Bridge Building, Gunpowder, and Magnetism, so the same technology that fuels ancient conquest becomes a foundation for later infrastructure and warfare.

@@Labor Union
Labor Union unlocks Mechanized Infantry, one of the strongest defensive land units in the game. It gives a modern empire a durable force for holding key cities and fronts against armor, artillery, and other late-game attackers.

@@Laser
Laser makes SDI Defense possible, giving cities a critical shield against nuclear attack. It also contributes to the Superconductors branch, so it combines direct strategic defense with continued progress toward the most advanced technologies.

@@Leadership
Leadership upgrades mounted warfare with Dragoons and leads directly to Tactics. It is especially useful when you want a mobile army to remain dangerous before the arrival of full industrial cavalry and armor.

@@Literacy
Literacy makes organized knowledge a strategic resource. The Great Library can pull in discoveries known by rival civilizations, and Literacy opens multiple branches toward Philosophy, Physics, Invention, and the Republic.

@@Machine Tools
Machine Tools brings industrial precision to the battlefield through Artillery. It also leads to Advanced Flight and Miniaturization, making it a key bridge between heavy weapons, aviation, offshore industry, and the computer age.

@@Magnetism
Magnetism produces stronger oceangoing fleets through Galleons and Frigates and leads toward Electricity. It also makes the Lighthouse obsolete, marking the point where navigation no longer depends on the ancient wonder's advantages.

@@Map Making
Map Making allows the first serious naval exploration with Triremes and enables the Lighthouse. It also begins the Seafaring branch, making it essential for island worlds, coastal expansion, and early contact with distant civilizations.

@@Masonry
Masonry is one of the strongest early infrastructure technologies. It unlocks the Palace, City Walls, Pyramids, and Great Wall, giving you tools for administration, defense, growth, and wonder-driven expansion almost immediately.

@@Mass Production
Mass Production brings modern urban industry to scale. Mass Transit helps control pollution while the technology opens Computers, Labor Union, Laser, Recycling, and Nuclear Fission, making it a central hub of the late-game tree.

@@Mathematics
Mathematics gives early armies siege power through the Catapult. It also leads to Astronomy and University, so it serves as both a military technology and a gateway into serious scientific development.

@@Medicine
Medicine improves the long-term health and happiness of a growing civilization. Shakespeare's Theatre can completely pacify its home city, and Medicine leads toward Sanitation, Chemistry, and Genetic Engineering.

@@Metallurgy
Metallurgy brings Cannon and Coastal Defense into play, improving both offensive siege power and protection against naval bombardment. It also leads toward Conscription and Electricity, though it makes the Great Wall obsolete.

@@Miniaturization
Miniaturization lets coastal cities exploit the sea more aggressively through Offshore Platforms. It also helps unlock Computers, tying advanced industrial engineering directly into the information age.

@@Mobile Warfare
Mobile Warfare brings Armor to the battlefield, giving land armies the speed and striking power needed for decisive modern offensives. It also leads to Combined Arms and Robotics, although its arrival makes Sun Tzu's War Academy obsolete.

@@Monarchy
Monarchy replaces the harsh limits of primitive government with a more stable system suited to expansion and warfare. It improves the practicality of larger empires and opens Feudalism, making it a classic early target when Despotism is holding your cities back.

@@Monotheism
Monotheism is both a civic and military upgrade. Cathedrals and Michelangelo's Chapel can suppress large amounts of unhappiness, while Crusaders provide a fast, hard-hitting offensive unit and Theology becomes available next.

@@Mysticism
Mysticism strengthens early religious institutions and unlocks the Oracle, whose Temple-enhancing effect can stabilize an expanding empire. It also opens the road toward Astronomy and Philosophy.

@@Navigation
Navigation makes long-distance sea power practical. Caravels and Magellan's Expedition improve exploration and fleet mobility, while the technology leads toward Amphibious Warfare and Physics.

@@Nuclear Fission
Nuclear Fission opens the Manhattan Project and starts the nuclear age. Once the necessary global and missile conditions are met, nuclear weapons become a strategic possibility, while Nuclear Power provides a more constructive use for the same scientific breakthrough.

@@Nuclear Power
Nuclear Power gives cities access to Nuclear Plants, allowing enormous industrial output with different tradeoffs from conventional power. It also opens the path to Laser and Fusion Power, placing your civilization firmly in the high-technology era.

@@Philosophy
Philosophy is a pivotal research technology: the first civilization to discover it is intended to gain a bonus advance, rewarding players who race for it. It also branches into Communism, Medicine, Monotheism, and University, so its strategic value extends far beyond the free discovery.

@@Physics
Physics is the scientific bridge between learned theory and the industrial age. It leads to Magnetism, Atomic Theory, and Steam Engine, putting naval modernization, nuclear science, and rail transport on the horizon.

@@Plastics
Plastics represents advanced materials engineering and the traditional space-age construction branch. In rhYciv it remains part of technological progression even though spaceship components and space-race victory are intentionally not part of the supported game.

@@Polytheism
Polytheism unlocks Elephants, a powerful early mounted attacker, and leads toward Monotheism. It gives religious development an immediate military payoff while preparing the way for much stronger happiness infrastructure.

@@Pottery
Pottery is an excellent growth technology. Granaries let cities retain food after population increases and the Hanging Gardens can improve happiness across the civilization, while Pottery also begins the Seafaring branch.

@@Radio
Radio turns aviation into a mature logistical system. Airports allow rapid movement and support of air forces, while Radio leads directly to Advanced Flight and the much heavier aircraft and carriers that follow.

@@Railroad
Railroad revolutionizes strategic movement by letting you build rail networks that can shift armies and economic resources across the empire at extraordinary speed. It also unlocks Darwin's Voyage and leads to Industrialization, though it ends the Hanging Gardens' effect.

@@Recycling
Recycling helps an industrial empire manage the pollution created by high production. Recycling Centers reduce the environmental cost of factories and power plants, and the advance leads toward Environmentalism for even cleaner late-game industry.

@@Refining
Refining unlocks the Power Plant and provides the industrial chemistry needed for Combustion and Plastics. It is the bridge from mature economics and chemistry into engines, advanced materials, and modern heavy industry.

@@Refrigeration
Refrigeration dramatically increases the food potential of developed cities. Supermarkets and advanced farming let fertile regions support very large populations, making it easier to staff specialist-heavy or high-production metropolises.

@@Robotics
Robotics combines extreme industrial output with devastating siege power. Manufacturing Plants multiply city production and Howitzers smash fortified targets, while the technology also contributes directly to Stealth.

@@Rocketry
Rocketry transforms long-range warfare. SAM Batteries defend cities from aircraft, AEGIS Cruisers strengthen fleet air defense, Cruise Missiles deliver massive conventional strikes, and nuclear delivery systems become possible once the Manhattan Project has opened the nuclear era.

@@Sanitation
Sanitation removes one of the major limits on urban growth. Sewer Systems allow cities to grow beyond the Aqueduct era and the technology leads to Refrigeration, making it essential for building the largest population centers.

@@Seafaring
Seafaring improves the value of coastal civilization. Harbors strengthen food production from ocean tiles, Explorers help reveal distant territory, and the technology leads to Navigation and truly reliable overseas expansion.

@@Space Flight
Space Flight unlocks the Apollo Program and the final space-age branches. Apollo provides extraordinary global intelligence, while rhYciv intentionally keeps victory focused on conquest rather than spaceship construction or a space-race ending.

@@Stealth
Stealth unlocks the most advanced aircraft in the game. Stealth Fighters and Stealth Bombers combine exceptional speed and firepower with the advantages of low-observable warfare, making them ideal for breaking late-game defenses and controlling huge theaters.

@@Steam Engine
Steam Engine ushers in mechanized industry and armored navies. Ironclads dominate older wooden fleets, the Eiffel Tower becomes available, and the technology leads directly to Railroad and the logistics revolution that follows.

@@Steel
Steel unlocks the Cruiser and provides the materials base for Automobile and Machine Tools. It is a key industrial military technology that links heavy manufacturing to modern fleets, vehicles, and artillery.

@@Superconductors
Superconductors is a late-game scientific breakthrough that opens both Fusion Power and Stealth. Its main value is access to the final tier of energy science and air warfare rather than an immediate city improvement of its own.

@@Tactics
Tactics modernizes the entire land-war doctrine. Alpine Troops cross rough terrain with remarkable speed, Cavalry provides powerful mobile attack, and the technology opens Amphibious Warfare, Guerilla Warfare, Machine Tools, and Mobile Warfare.

@@The Corporation
The Corporation turns a developed economy into a modern commercial system. Freight improves long-distance trade, Capitalization converts unused production into money, and the technology opens major branches toward Electronics, Mass Production, Refining, and Genetic Engineering.

@@The Republic
The Republic is a major economic government upgrade. It rewards developed trade networks and can produce excellent science and income, though deployed military forces require more careful happiness management; it also leads toward Banking.

@@The Wheel
The Wheel upgrades early mobility with the Chariot and leads toward Engineering. It gives expansionist players a faster attacker while also serving as a necessary step toward stronger infrastructure.

@@Theology
Theology unlocks J.S. Bach's Cathedral, providing a major happiness advantage, and leads toward Fundamentalism. Reaching Theology also makes the Oracle obsolete, shifting religious power from ancient Temple bonuses to later institutions and governments.

@@Theory of Gravity
Theory of Gravity pushes scientific cities into a new era. Isaac Newton's College can massively increase research in its home city, and the advance leads toward both Atomic Theory and Flight.

@@Trade
Trade makes commerce an active strategic system. Caravans can establish lucrative trade routes and help construct wonders, while Marco Polo's Embassy opens broad diplomatic contact; the technology also leads to Banking and Medicine.

@@University
University enables the University improvement, giving established science cities another major research multiplier. It also opens Chemistry, Economics, Metallurgy, and Theory of Gravity, making it a crucial midgame research hub.

@@Warrior Code
Warrior Code gives your civilization an early offensive option through Archers and leads to both Iron Working and Feudalism. It is a strong starting technology for players who expect early conflict or want a fast military branch.

@@Writing
Writing turns knowledge and diplomacy into practical tools. Libraries accelerate science, Diplomats open espionage and negotiation tactics, and Writing leads directly to Literacy and the powerful research branches beyond it.

@@IMPROVEMENT_INDEX
0,Nothing
1,Palace
2,Barracks
3,Granary
4,Temple
5,Marketplace
6,Library
7,Courthouse
8,City Walls
9,Aqueduct
10,Bank
11,Cathedral
12,University
13,Mass Transit
14,Colosseum
15,Factory
16,Mfg. Plant
17,SDI Defense
18,Recycling Center
19,Power Plant
20,Hydro Plant
21,Nuclear Plant
22,Stock Exchange
23,Sewer System
24,Supermarket
25,Super Highways
26,Research Lab
27,SAM Battery
28,Coastal Defense
29,Solar Plant
30,Harbor
31,Offshore Platform
32,Airport
33,Police Station
34,Port Facility
35,Unused Structural
36,Unused Component
37,Unused Module
38,Capitalization
39,Pyramids
40,Hanging Gardens
41,Colossus
42,Lighthouse
43,Great Library
44,Oracle
45,Great Wall
46,Sun Tzu's War Academy
47,King Richard's Crusade
48,Marco Polo's Embassy
49,Michelangelo's Chapel
50,Copernicus' Observatory
51,Magellan's Expedition
52,Shakespeare's Theatre
53,Leonardo's Workshop
54,J.S. Bach's Cathedral
55,Isaac Newton's College
56,A.Smith's Trading Co.
57,Darwin's Voyage
58,Statue of Liberty
59,Eiffel Tower
60,Hoover Dam
61,Women's Suffrage
62,Manhattan Project
63,United Nations
64,Apollo Program
65,SETI Program
66,Cure for Cancer
-2
@@Nothing

@@Palace
The Palace establishes the city as the capital of your civilization. It eliminates corruption and waste in the capital and acts as the center from which distance-based corruption and waste are measured throughout the empire. Under Democracy it also contributes to citizen happiness. A well-placed Palace can dramatically improve the efficiency of an empire whose productive cities would otherwise be far from the seat of government.

@@Barracks
Barracks turn a city into a dependable military training center. New land combat units produced there begin as Veterans, making them stronger and more likely to survive combat. Barracks also provide the intended rapid-restoration function for land units: a damaged ground unit that spends a full turn resting in a city with Barracks can be restored much more quickly. They are especially valuable in high-production cities that continuously supply the front.

@@Granary
A Granary preserves half of a city's accumulated food whenever the city grows. Instead of beginning each new population level with an empty food box, the city keeps a substantial reserve and can grow again much sooner. Granaries are therefore among the best early investments for cities with strong food production or for settlements you want to turn into major population centers.

@@Temple
A Temple reduces local unhappiness, normally turning one unhappy citizen content. After Mysticism its effect becomes stronger, and the Oracle can further amplify it while that Wonder remains active. Temples are inexpensive tools for keeping early cities productive, preventing disorder, and supporting population growth before more powerful happiness improvements become available.

@@Marketplace
A Marketplace increases both Tax and Luxury output by 50 percent. The bonus compounds with later financial improvements such as Banks and Stock Exchanges, so a Marketplace is the foundation of a wealthy commercial city. It is especially useful in cities producing substantial trade, where the same improvement can simultaneously increase treasury income and help keep citizens happy through additional Luxuries.

@@Library
A Library increases the city's Science output by 50 percent. Its bonus stacks with Universities and Research Labs, allowing a strong trade city to become a major research center. Building Libraries early in your best commercial cities can accelerate the entire technology tree and help create a lasting military and economic advantage.

@@Courthouse
A Courthouse reduces corruption and waste, allowing a distant city to keep more of the trade and shields it produces. It also makes the city more resistant to hostile bribery and, under Democracy, contributes an additional happiness benefit. Courthouses are particularly useful in large empires where productive frontier cities lie far from the capital.

@@City Walls
City Walls make a settlement dramatically harder to capture by multiplying the defense of units inside it against conventional ground attacks. They are one of the strongest defensive investments in the game because they have no maintenance cost and can turn even modest garrisons into formidable obstacles. Specialized weapons such as Howitzers are intended to ignore this protection, so Walls are powerful but not absolute.

@@Aqueduct
An Aqueduct allows a city to grow beyond size 8. Without one, a well-fed city eventually reaches its population ceiling no matter how much surplus food it produces. Build Aqueducts in cities with enough food and happiness to benefit from continued growth; small or food-poor settlements can usually postpone the expense.

@@Bank
A Bank adds another 50 percent to the city's Tax and Luxury output, cumulative with the Marketplace. In a major trade city this can produce a large increase in both government revenue and happiness-generating Luxuries. Banks are most efficient where the underlying trade output is already high enough to justify their greater construction and maintenance costs.

@@Cathedral
A Cathedral is a major happiness improvement, normally reducing unhappiness by three citizens. Theology increases its effectiveness by one additional citizen, while Communism reduces it by one. Cathedrals are excellent for stabilizing large cities, supporting high tax or science rates with fewer Luxuries, and keeping heavily populated industrial centers out of disorder.

@@University
A University increases Science output by another 50 percent, cumulative with a Library. In a strong research city, the combination turns trade into technology at a much faster rate and helps your civilization reach advanced military, industrial, and economic discoveries before its rivals. Universities are especially effective in cities already producing significant trade.

@@Mass Transit
Mass Transit eliminates pollution caused by population. This lets very large cities continue growing without their sheer size adding to the pollution problem, leaving only industrial sources to manage. It is particularly valuable in dense late-game metropolitan areas where population pollution would otherwise consume worker time and threaten the environment.

@@Colosseum
A Colosseum reduces unhappiness by three citizens, making it one of the strongest general-purpose happiness buildings available before the modern era. After Electronics, its effect improves to four citizens. Its maintenance is substantial, so it is best used in large cities that genuinely need the extra stability rather than automatically built everywhere.

@@Factory
A Factory increases the city's shield production by 50 percent, greatly accelerating the construction of units, improvements, and Wonders. It is the foundation of the industrial production chain and enables the strongest later production infrastructure. The drawback is heavier industrial pollution, so highly productive factory cities eventually benefit from cleaner power and pollution-control improvements.

@@Mfg. Plant
A Manufacturing Plant adds another major production bonus on top of a Factory, turning an established industrial city into a late-game production powerhouse. It is expensive to build and maintain, but in the right city it can shorten construction times for advanced military units and major projects dramatically. Its value is greatest where strong base shield production already exists.

@@SDI Defense
SDI Defense protects the city and its surrounding area from nuclear attack. In a nuclear era, it can preserve a critical production center, capital, or troop concentration that would otherwise be vulnerable to a single devastating strike. Because its benefit is defensive and specialized, it is most important in cities that an enemy is likely to target with nuclear weapons.

@@Recycling Center
A Recycling Center cuts industrial pollution from shield production to roughly one third of its normal level. This allows a city to maintain heavy industrial output while creating far fewer polluted tiles, reducing the amount of Settler or Engineer labor needed for cleanup. It is an efficient environmental upgrade for mature Factory and Manufacturing Plant cities.

@@Power Plant
A Power Plant supplies additional power to an industrial city, providing the power-plant production bonus when used with a Factory or Manufacturing Plant. It is the earliest conventional way to push industrial output beyond Factory levels, but unlike cleaner alternatives it does not reduce production pollution. It is useful when raw production matters more than environmental efficiency or before better power plants become available.

@@Hydro Plant
A Hydro Plant provides the same major industrial power bonus as other advanced power sources while cutting pollution from shield production roughly in half. It combines high output with good environmental performance and has no meltdown risk, making it one of the safest ways to power a major industrial city. The Hoover Dam provides the equivalent benefit civilization-wide.

@@Nuclear Plant
A Nuclear Plant provides the industrial power bonus at a relatively low maintenance cost while also reducing production pollution to about half its normal level. Its great drawback is the intended risk of a catastrophic reactor meltdown if the city falls into disorder; discovering Fusion Power removes that danger. Used in stable cities, Nuclear Plants offer an efficient combination of production and pollution control.

@@Stock Exchange
A Stock Exchange adds another 50 percent to Tax and Luxury output, stacking with the Marketplace and Bank. In a top-tier commercial city, the complete financial chain can generate enormous revenue or Luxury output from the same underlying trade. Stock Exchanges are expensive, so they are most profitable in cities that already produce abundant trade.

@@Sewer System
A Sewer System allows a city to grow beyond size 12. It is the late-game counterpart to the Aqueduct and becomes essential for turning prosperous cities into true metropolises. Because larger populations demand more food and happiness management, it is best built where the city has enough resources and infrastructure to support continued growth.

@@Supermarket
A Supermarket increases the food gained from improved agricultural land, allowing irrigated and farmland tiles to support much larger populations. It is most valuable in cities with many productive farm tiles, where the extra food can drive metropolitan growth, support more specialists, or free citizens to work high-shield and high-trade terrain instead.

@@Super Highways
Super Highways increase trade from worked land tiles connected by roads or railroads, with the intended classic effect providing 50 percent more trade from those developed squares. They also strengthen the value of major trade connections. In a mature commercial city with a dense road network, Super Highways can produce a large jump in Taxes, Luxuries, and Science all at once.

@@Research Lab
A Research Lab adds another 50 percent to Science output, cumulative with Libraries and Universities. It is the final major city-level research multiplier and can turn a well-developed trade city into an exceptional scientific center. Research Labs are ideal when you are racing toward late-game military and strategic technologies.

@@SAM Battery
A SAM Battery doubles the defensive strength of units in the city against conventional air attacks. It is particularly useful for protecting valuable industrial cities, capitals, and coastal bases from Fighters, Bombers, and Stealth aircraft. Nuclear weapons are handled by SDI Defense instead, so advanced cities may need both forms of protection.

@@Coastal Defense
Coastal Defense doubles the defensive strength of units in the city against attacks from naval units. It is inexpensive insurance for important ports and exposed coastal cities, making bombardment and seaborne assaults much more costly for an enemy. Because it requires access to the ocean, inland cities have no need for it.

@@Solar Plant
A Solar Plant combines the industrial power bonus with the cleanest production system available. It eliminates pollution generated by industrial shield production and also reduces the population-related pollution pressure that contributes to global environmental damage. Solar Plants are expensive, but they let heavily industrialized late-game cities maintain maximum output with minimal environmental cost.

@@Harbor
A Harbor adds one Food to each worked ocean tile in the city's radius. This transforms coastal water from a trade-heavy but food-poor resource into a much stronger source of population support. Harbors are often essential for island cities and coastal settlements that work many ocean tiles, allowing them to grow without abandoning their valuable maritime trade.

@@Offshore Platform
An Offshore Platform adds one Shield to each worked ocean tile in the city's radius. Coastal cities that previously relied on land for nearly all of their production can turn the sea into a meaningful industrial resource while retaining its trade value. The improvement is especially powerful in island cities with many ocean tiles and little productive land.

@@Airport
An Airport turns a city into an air-power and rapid-transport hub. New air units produced there begin as Veterans, damaged aircraft can be completely restored after spending a full turn in the city, and the intended airlift system allows one unit per turn to move rapidly between cities equipped with Airports. Airports are invaluable for reinforcing distant fronts and sustaining large air forces.

@@Police Station
A Police Station reduces the unhappiness caused by military units operating away from their home city. Under Republic it can eliminate the remaining field-unit happiness penalty, while under Democracy it cuts the normal penalty substantially. This lets peaceful governments sustain larger overseas or offensive armies without forcing their home cities into disorder.

@@Port Facility
A Port Facility turns a coastal city into a first-class naval base. New sea units produced there begin as Veterans, and damaged ships that spend a full turn in the city can be completely repaired. Port Facilities are ideal in forward naval bases and high-production coastal cities that need to build, restore, and redeploy fleets quickly.

@@Unused Structural

@@Unused Component

@@Unused Module

@@Capitalization
Capitalization is not a permanent building. When selected as a city's production, it converts the city's shield output into additional treasury income instead of accumulating construction progress. It is useful in mature cities that have nothing urgent to build, allowing excess industrial capacity to strengthen the civilization's finances rather than sit idle.

@@Pyramids

@@Hanging Gardens

@@Colossus

@@Lighthouse

@@Great Library

@@Oracle

@@Great Wall

@@Sun Tzu's War Academy

@@King Richard's Crusade

@@Marco Polo's Embassy

@@Michelangelo's Chapel

@@Copernicus' Observatory

@@Magellan's Expedition

@@Shakespeare's Theatre

@@Leonardo's Workshop

@@J.S. Bach's Cathedral

@@Isaac Newton's College

@@A.Smith's Trading Co.

@@Darwin's Voyage

@@Statue of Liberty

@@Eiffel Tower

@@Hoover Dam

@@Women's Suffrage

@@Manhattan Project

@@United Nations

@@Apollo Program

@@SETI Program

@@Cure for Cancer

@@WONDER_INDEX
0,Pyramids
1,Hanging Gardens
2,Colossus
3,Lighthouse
4,Great Library
5,Oracle
6,Great Wall
7,Sun Tzu's War Academy
8,King Richard's Crusade
9,Marco Polo's Embassy
10,Michelangelo's Chapel
11,Copernicus' Observatory
12,Magellan's Expedition
13,Shakespeare's Theatre
14,Leonardo's Workshop
15,J.S. Bach's Cathedral
16,Isaac Newton's College
17,A.Smith's Trading Co.
18,Darwin's Voyage
19,Statue of Liberty
20,Eiffel Tower
21,Hoover Dam
22,Women's Suffrage
23,Manhattan Project
24,United Nations
25,Apollo Program
26,SETI Program
27,Cure for Cancer
-2
@@Pyramids
The Pyramids give every city in your civilization the benefits of a Granary. Cities retain half of their stored food after population growth, allowing them to recover and grow again much faster. This is one of the strongest early expansion wonders because its benefit applies across your entire empire and remains useful for the rest of the game.

@@Hanging Gardens
The Hanging Gardens make your people dramatically happier during the ancient and medieval eras. The city containing the wonder receives a major happiness boost, while every other city in your civilization receives a smaller one. It is especially valuable for supporting rapid early growth, reducing disorder, and allowing a larger empire to remain productive before modern happiness improvements become widely available.

@@Colossus
The Colossus transforms its home city into a commercial powerhouse. Every worked tile in that city that already produces trade generates one additional trade arrow. Because that extra trade can become taxes, luxuries, or science, the Colossus is particularly powerful in a large coastal city with strong trade terrain and research improvements.

@@Lighthouse
The Lighthouse gives your civilization a decisive early advantage at sea. Naval units move one extra square each turn, newly built ships are veteran, and primitive vessels can cross dangerous open water without the normal risk of being lost. It can enable exploration, colonization, and surprise naval warfare long before rival civilizations are ready to operate safely across the oceans.

@@Great Library
The Great Library helps a civilization keep pace with the world's scientific leaders. Whenever at least two other civilizations know a technology that you do not, the Great Library grants that advance to you automatically. It is an excellent wonder for a civilization that is expanding, waging war, or spending less on research, because it can fill important gaps in your technology tree at no research cost.

@@Oracle
The Oracle doubles the happiness effect of Temples throughout your civilization. This makes inexpensive Temples far more effective at controlling unrest, allowing cities to grow larger and remain productive with less reliance on entertainers or luxury spending. Its value is greatest before Cathedrals and other later happiness tools become common.

@@Great Wall
The Great Wall protects every city in your civilization as though it had City Walls, providing a major defensive advantage against land attacks. It also strengthens your forces against barbarian threats. For an expanding empire surrounded by rivals, the Great Wall can save enormous production that would otherwise be spent fortifying individual cities.

@@Sun Tzu's War Academy
Sun Tzu's War Academy makes every newly produced ground combat unit in your civilization a veteran. Veteran units fight more effectively and are more likely to survive long campaigns, making this wonder enormously valuable for conquest. Its empire-wide military benefit effectively gives every city the most important advantage of a Barracks for land forces.

@@King Richard's Crusade
King Richard's Crusade turns its home city into an extraordinary production center. Every worked tile in the wonder city produces one additional shield. In a large, well-developed city this can dramatically accelerate the construction of military units, improvements, and later wonders, making the city one of the industrial centers of the world until modern industry renders the effect obsolete.

@@Marco Polo's Embassy
Marco Polo's Embassy establishes diplomatic contact and embassies with every other civilization. You gain immediate access to diplomatic relations, intelligence, negotiation, and technology trading without first sending diplomats across the map. Built early, it can reveal the political shape of the world and create opportunities for alliances, trade, tribute, and carefully chosen wars.

@@Michelangelo's Chapel
Michelangelo's Chapel provides the equivalent happiness effect of a Cathedral in every city you control. Large empires benefit enormously because cities can remain orderly and productive without each one having to build and maintain its own Cathedral. The wonder remains useful throughout the game and is especially powerful for civilizations pursuing rapid population growth or sustained warfare.

@@Copernicus' Observatory
Copernicus' Observatory increases science output in its home city by 50 percent. Place it in your strongest research city—ideally one with high trade, a Library, a University, and later a Research Lab—to create a scientific center capable of producing a disproportionate share of your civilization's research.

@@Magellan's Expedition
Magellan's Expedition increases the movement of every naval unit in your civilization by two squares per turn. Faster ships explore more efficiently, reinforce distant fronts sooner, escort transports more safely, and give your navy greater tactical reach. For civilizations dependent on overseas conquest or intercontinental transport, this is one of the most powerful strategic mobility wonders in the game.

@@Shakespeare's Theatre
Shakespeare's Theatre eliminates unhappiness in its home city. Even a very large metropolis can remain productive without entertainers or heavy luxury spending, making the wonder city an ideal location for intense industrial production, scientific development, or support of a large overseas military under governments that normally suffer war weariness.

@@Leonardo's Workshop
Leonardo's Workshop continuously modernizes your armed forces. As new military technologies become available, obsolete units are upgraded toward newer equivalent unit types without the normal replacement cost. This can preserve the value of a large veteran army and save vast amounts of production during the transition from medieval to industrial warfare.

@@J.S. Bach's Cathedral
J.S. Bach's Cathedral reduces unhappiness in your cities, making two unhappy citizens content in cities connected to the wonder's regional sphere of influence. It is especially useful for large empires and wartime governments, where military deployments and empire size can otherwise produce widespread unrest.

@@Isaac Newton's College
Isaac Newton's College doubles science output in its home city. Combined with Copernicus' Observatory and normal research improvements, it can create an exceptional scientific capital that races through the technology tree. Building multiple science multipliers in the same high-trade city produces some of the strongest research output available in rhYciv.

@@A.Smith's Trading Co.
Adam Smith's Trading Company pays the maintenance cost of every city improvement in your civilization that normally costs one gold per turn. Across a large empire this can save a tremendous amount of money each turn, freeing your treasury for rush-building, diplomacy, taxes, or a higher science rate.

@@Darwin's Voyage
Darwin's Voyage immediately grants two free technological advances when the wonder is completed. The effect is instantaneous, making careful timing important: building it when expensive or strategically crucial technologies are available can produce a dramatic leap forward and may unlock powerful units, governments, or improvements several turns ahead of your rivals.

@@Statue of Liberty
The Statue of Liberty gives your civilization extraordinary political flexibility. You may adopt any form of government regardless of whether you have researched its normal prerequisite, and changes of government can be made with greatly reduced disruption. This allows you to switch between economic, democratic, and wartime governments as circumstances demand.

@@Eiffel Tower
The Eiffel Tower improves the international reputation and diplomatic standing of your civilization. Rival leaders view your nation more favorably, making peaceful relations, negotiations, and diplomatic recovery easier. It is most valuable to players who rely heavily on alliances, treaties, technology exchange, and manipulation of the balance of power between competing civilizations.

@@Hoover Dam
Hoover Dam provides the production benefit of a Hydro Plant to every city in your civilization. Cities with Factories receive a major industrial boost without having to construct individual power plants, and the hydroelectric effect avoids the pollution associated with conventional power generation. In a large industrial empire, Hoover Dam can add an enormous amount of total shield production.

@@Women's Suffrage
Women's Suffrage reduces the unhappiness caused by military units operating away from home under representative governments. Republics and Democracies can therefore wage larger and longer wars without suffering as much civil disorder. It is an especially important wonder for players who want the economic strength of democratic government without abandoning overseas military campaigns.

@@Manhattan Project
The Manhattan Project unlocks the nuclear age. Once completed, civilizations with the necessary technology can build nuclear weapons. The wonder changes the strategic balance of the entire world rather than benefiting only its builder: nuclear deterrence, preemptive strikes, and the threat of catastrophic retaliation immediately become central considerations in diplomacy and warfare.

@@United Nations
The United Nations gives its owner exceptional diplomatic influence. It makes negotiations and peaceful settlements easier, strengthens your ability to manage international crises, and can help prevent unwanted wars from spiraling out of control. It is particularly valuable to a civilization trying to choose its wars carefully while maintaining favorable relations with the rest of the world.

@@Apollo Program
The Apollo Program reveals the world on a global scale, exposing the geography of the planet and the locations of rival cities. In traditional rules it also opens the path to space-race construction; rhYciv's streamlined conquest-focused game does not rely on spaceship victory, but the intelligence value of global reconnaissance remains strategically important for planning the final stages of a world war.

@@SETI Program
The SETI Program provides the science benefit of a Research Lab in every city in your civilization. This empire-wide research multiplier can produce a huge increase in total science output, especially in a large and highly developed civilization, and helps propel your technology rate through the late game.

@@Cure for Cancer
The Cure for Cancer makes one additional citizen happy in every city in your civilization. Because the effect is empire-wide and permanent, it is especially valuable in a large late-game empire where population, war weariness, and the sheer number of cities make happiness increasingly difficult to manage.

@@UNIT_INDEX
0,Settlers
1,Engineers
2,Warriors
3,Phalanx
4,Archers
5,Legion
6,Pikemen
7,Musketeers
8,Fanatics
9,Partisan
10,Alpine Troops
11,Riflemen
12,Marines
13,Paratroopers
14,Mech. Inf.
15,Horsemen
16,Chariot
17,Elephants
18,Crusaders
19,Knights
20,Dragoons
21,Cavalry
22,Armor
23,Catapult
24,Cannon
25,Artillery
26,Howitzer
27,Fighter
28,Bomber
29,Helicopter
30,Stealth Fighter
31,Stealth Bomber
32,Trireme
33,Caravel
34,Galleon
35,Frigate
36,Ironclad
37,Destroyer
38,Cruiser
39,AEGIS Cruiser
40,Battleship
41,Submarine
42,Carrier
43,Transport
44,Cruise Missile
45,Nuclear
46,Diplomat
47,Spy
48,Caravan
49,Freight
50,Explorer
-2
@@Settlers
Settlers are the foundation of expansion. They can found new cities and improve the land with roads, irrigation, mines, fortresses, pollution cleanup, and other terrain work, turning empty territory into a productive empire. Their main cost is strategic rather than military: producing one reduces the home city's population, so good timing matters.

@@Engineers
Engineers are the advanced replacement for basic Settlers as a terrain-development force. They move twice as fast, perform improvement work at double the rate, and can carry out the most advanced terrain engineering, allowing a mature civilization to reshape its economy and military infrastructure much more quickly.

@@Warriors
Every civilisation starts with men who fight because they are told to, armed with whatever the village can spare. Build a few to garrison your first cities and to walk beside your first settlers. They will lose to anything trained, so treat them as a stopgap and replace them the moment Bronze Working arrives.

@@Phalanx
The Greek line of overlapping shields and levelled spears held ground that nothing else of its age could break. Put one in every border city and leave it there. It is the cheapest thing you can build that reliably survives being attacked, which frees everything else to go forward.

@@Archers
Massed bowmen were the first way to hurt an enemy before he reached you, and the first troops worth training rather than merely levying. This is the first unit you can genuinely attack with, good enough to clear a barbarian camp or take a thinly held town. Keep a couple near the frontier, because they defend well enough to hold a city in an emergency.

@@Legion
Rome's short sword, heavy javelin and relentless drill took the ancient world with a formation almost anyone could be trained into. Iron Working is the moment your empire becomes a threat, and a stack of Legions will break anything the ancient world puts in front of it. Build the roads first, because the window closes as soon as a neighbour reaches Feudalism.

@@Pikemen
The pike square ended the age of the charge, because horses will not run onto a wall of points however brave the rider. Against mounted troops they defend at double strength, which makes them cheap insurance anywhere cavalry might appear. Against everything else they are only a Phalanx, so garrison with them for the threat you actually expect.

@@Musketeers
Gunpowder made a decade of training unnecessary, and armies stopped being the property of the rich. This is the first unit that is genuinely good at both jobs, holding a city as well as anything of its age and still able to march out and take one. Replace your ageing Phalanxes and Pikemen with them and your defensive worries largely end for an era.

@@Fanatics
Belief turned into a weapon: soldiers who fight without pay because they are certain the cause is worth dying for. Under Fundamentalism they cost nothing to support, so an army that would bankrupt any other government is very nearly free. No other government can raise them, which is most of the argument for adopting that one.

@@Partisan
Occupation creates its own army of men who know the ground, move through the gaps, and cannot be cornered because they are already home. They ignore zones of control, so they go where regular troops cannot: behind a front, into supply lines, around a city that believes itself safe. Use them to cut a corridor rather than to hold one, because they are far better at arriving than at staying.

@@Alpine Troops
Mountain regiments were trained to fight where roads do not go and to arrive having climbed what the enemy assumed was impassable. They treat every square as roaded, crossing broken country at the speed of an army on a highway. Send them at ground nobody thought needed watching, and at the long way round a defended pass.

@@Riflemen
The rifle put an accurate, long-ranged weapon in a conscript's hands, and for a century afterwards defending was cheaper than attacking. Build them the turn Conscription arrives and you can largely stop worrying about your cities. They are the line every later offensive unit is designed to break, so keep them fortified and behind walls.

@@Marines
Marines are trained to arrive by sea and fight from the moment the ramp comes down. They assault a city straight off the ship, so no coastal capital is ever safe from a fleet. Every other land unit has to come ashore and wait a turn, which is exactly the turn a defender needs.

@@Paratroopers
Dropping men behind the line was the twentieth century's answer to a front that could not be broken through. They jump to any square you can see, which turns a defended border into a suggestion. They land alone and lightly armed, so drop them onto something worth holding and reinforce it quickly.

@@Mech. Inf.
Infantry that rides to the battle inside armour and gets out to fight is how modern armies kept foot soldiers relevant. This is the most solid defensive unit in the game, and fast enough to reach the trouble rather than wait for it. A few behind a front will hold it against anything short of a determined armoured push.

@@Horsemen
The first soldiers who could choose where to fight, because they could get there before anybody else. They are not strong, but they are twice the speed of anything else on the board. Send them out to find the enemy, reach a hut first, and run down settlers caught in the open.

@@Chariot
Bronze-age shock: a platform that carried a fighting man into contact faster than anyone could run from him. Genuinely dangerous early, and worthless the moment a real defensive unit appears. Spend them while they are still worth something rather than saving them for a war you have not started.

@@Elephants
Elephants broke armies that had never met one, and trampled their own side when they had. A strong early attacker for anyone who reaches Polytheism, and no better protected than a horseman. Keep them moving forward, because standing still in the open is what gets them killed.

@@Crusaders
Armies that crossed a continent because they had been told the other end of it was owed to them. This is the hardest-hitting mounted unit of its age by a clear margin. It cannot hold what it takes, so send a garrison up behind it or lose the city back within a turn.

@@Knights
For three centuries the armoured horseman was the most expensive and most decisive thing on any battlefield. It has slightly less punch than a Crusader and enough armour to survive the counter-attack. That makes it the first mounted unit you can afford to leave standing in the field rather than shuttling home.

@@Dragoons
Mounted infantry rode to the fight and dismounted to win it, which is how armies stayed mobile once standing in the open turned fatal. They are tougher than a knight and hit harder. This is the unit that keeps a Renaissance army moving while the muskets do the killing.

@@Cavalry
The last age in which horsemen decided battles was also the first in which machine guns cut them down in rows. Enormous attack for the price, and the best offensive value in the game for a short while. Use it before your enemies entrench behind Riflemen, because after that it dies for nothing.

@@Armor
The tank ended the trench by carrying its own protection forward instead of waiting for the guns to lift. Fast, heavily armed and very hard to stop, a stack of these is how modern wars are won here. Screen them from Artillery and never leave them parked in the open.

@@Catapult
The catapult was the first machine built to knock a wall down rather than find a way over it. It hits harder than anything else of its era and cannot defend itself at all. Never let one stand alone: keep a Phalanx on the square, and move it only when the target is already in reach.

@@Cannon
Gunpowder artillery made the high stone wall obsolete within a generation, and every fortress built afterwards looks different. It is devastating on the attack and helpless on its own, exactly like the catapult it replaces. Move it with an escort and spend it on cities rather than on field battles.

@@Artillery
Indirect fire killed men who never saw the guns, and did most of the killing in both world wars. It strikes twice for every round it wins, which tears through defenders that would hold against anything else. It still cannot defend itself, and it is worth every unit you assign to guard it.

@@Howitzer
Howitzers were heavy guns built to break fortifications rather than to fight troops. Their shells ignore city walls entirely, turning the strongest defensive improvement in the game into no improvement at all. If a city has held out against everything else you own, this is the answer to it.

@@Fighter
Fighters were built for one purpose: taking the sky away from the other side's aircraft. Besides the AEGIS Cruiser this is the only thing that can attack an aeroplane at all. It must reach a city, airbase or carrier by the end of its turn, or it simply comes down.

@@Bomber
The belief that a war could be won from above was tested to destruction over Europe. It hits harder than any other conventional unit and no ordinary ground troops can touch it. Fighters can, and it carries only two turns of fuel, so plan the way home before you take off.

@@Helicopter
The helicopter could put firepower onto ground with no airstrip within a hundred miles of it. Alone among aircraft it need not land at the end of a turn, so it can hold a position where nothing else can. A Fighter will destroy it easily, so keep it out of contested air.

@@Stealth Fighter
Shaped and coated so that radar has almost nothing to send back. It is faster and better protected than a conventional fighter. This is the unit that takes air superiority back once an enemy has taken it from you.

@@Stealth Bomber
The heaviest strike ever mounted from the air, and the hardest thing in the sky to intercept. It is expensive enough that losing one genuinely hurts. Send it after targets worth the price: a wonder city, a carrier, or a stack you have no way of reaching on the ground.

@@Trireme
Oared warships fought by ramming and dared not spend a night out of sight of land. It must stay near the coast or risk being lost, so it explores a shoreline rather than an ocean. Ferry settlers along your own coast with it and wait for a better hull before crossing anything.

@@Caravel
The caravel made the Atlantic crossable, being small, seaworthy and able to sail against the wind rather than waiting on it. This is the first hull that can leave the coast without fear. Discovery and your first colony on somebody else's continent both begin here.

@@Galleon
A merchant hull built for cargo and distance, and rich enough to be worth taking. It carries more than anything before it and cannot defend itself. Never sail one without an escort, and never put your whole army in one bottom.

@@Frigate
The workhorse of the age of sail was fast enough to run, armed enough to fight, and roomy enough to carry troops. This is the first ship that can both escort a landing and win the battle that interrupts it. Two of them will clear a coast of anything older and still put a raiding party ashore.

@@Ironclad
Armour plate over a steam hull made every wooden navy in the world worthless in a single afternoon. It does not wait on the wind and it shrugs off anything from the age of sail. Build them as soon as the Steam Engine arrives and sweep the sea clear before anyone catches up.

@@Destroyer
Destroyers were small, fast ships built to screen a fleet and hunt what was beneath it. Their speed and long sight make them the eyes of a navy. They are also the first answer anybody has to a submarine, so keep one with anything valuable.

@@Cruiser
A cruiser was strong enough to fight alone and fast enough to be somewhere else by morning. This is the first hull that can operate independently rather than as part of a battle line. Use them to hunt transports and close a coast without committing anything you cannot afford to lose.

@@AEGIS Cruiser
Built around a radar and missile system designed to keep aircraft away from a fleet. It is the only ship that can shoot at aeroplanes, and it defends against them far better than anything else afloat. One with your fleet changes what an enemy air force is willing to attempt.

@@Battleship
The battleship was the most powerful thing that ever floated, and obsolete within a generation of its peak. Nothing else at sea will stand against one. It costs as much as a small army, so keep it clear of submarines and aircraft, which is what finished off the real ones.

@@Submarine
The submarine is a ship that wins by not being seen. It strikes very hard, cannot take a hit in return, and most units cannot see it until it attacks. Send it after transports and lone warships, and keep it well away from Destroyers.

@@Carrier
The carrier replaced the battleship by carrying its guns in the air instead of on the deck. It is a mobile airbase: whatever it can reach, its aircraft can strike. It cannot defend itself against a serious attack, so it travels with a fleet or it does not travel.

@@Transport
The unglamorous hull decides wars, because an invasion is only ever as large as the shipping that carries it. It moves a whole army and cannot fight at all. Escort it, and never let it be caught at sea with your army aboard.

@@Cruise Missile
A pilotless aircraft that flies itself into the target and is gone. It hits enormously hard and is spent doing so. Keep them for things worth one missile each: a Battleship, a Carrier, or a stack one turn from your border.

@@Nuclear
The weapon that ended one war has shaped every year since. It destroys what it strikes and poisons the ground around it long afterwards. Building the first one is less a military decision than a decision about what kind of game everybody is now playing.

@@Diplomat
An envoy carried instructions and a purse, which in most periods amounted to much the same thing. Walked into somebody else's city he can report what is inside it, steal one of their secrets, or buy the place outright. He does not come home from any of it, so send him at something worth a unit.

@@Spy
The spy is the professional successor to the envoy: better trained, further-seeing, and expected to come back. He does all the same work and walks away having spent only a move rather than his life. That difference is the entire argument for researching Espionage.

@@Caravan
Caravans are economic support units that ignore enemy zones of control. They can establish trade routes for long-term commerce and immediate rewards, deliver valuable commodities to distant cities, and contribute their production toward Wonders, allowing a trade-focused civilization to turn mobility into both wealth and accelerated construction.

@@Freight
Freight is the faster modern successor to the Caravan. It performs the same trade-route, commodity-delivery, and Wonder-support functions but moves twice as fast, making long-distance commerce easier to manage and allowing economic support to reach major projects or foreign markets much sooner.

@@Explorer
The Explorer is a dedicated reconnaissance unit that cannot attack but can ignore enemy zones of control. It is useful for revealing unknown territory, reaching tribal villages and remote objectives, scouting routes for later armies, and slipping through contested regions without being pinned by normal front-line control rules.

@@TERRAIN_INDEX
0,Desert
1,Plains
2,Grassland
3,Forest
4,Hills
5,Mountains
6,Tundra
7,Glacier
8,Swamp
9,Jungle
10,Ocean
11,Oasis
12,Buffalo
13,Resources
14,Pheasant
15,Coal
16,Gold
17,Game
18,Ivory
19,Peat
20,Gems
21,Fish
22,Oil
23,Wheat
24,Bonus
25,Silk
26,Wine
27,Iron
28,Furs
29,Icy Oil
30,Spice
31,Fruit
32,Whales
-2
@@Desert
Desert is poor city land in its natural state, but it is far from useless. Irrigation can make it productive enough to support population, while mining can increase its shield output. Desert is particularly valuable when it contains an Oasis or Oil resource. Because movement is inexpensive and defensive protection is modest, deserts also tend to become open maneuver corridors during war.

@@Plains
Plains are balanced, dependable settlement terrain. Their combination of food and shields makes them useful immediately, and irrigation turns them into strong population-supporting tiles. A city surrounded by Plains can usually grow while still maintaining respectable production, especially when Buffalo or Wheat is present.

@@Grassland
Grassland is one of the best foundations for city growth. Its strong natural food output supports large populations with little preparation, allowing citizens to work less fertile but more productive tiles elsewhere. Irrigation pushes that advantage even further. Grassland is usually excellent territory for early cities and dense settlement networks.

@@Forest
Forest trades speed and food for production and protection. It naturally produces two shields and grants a stronger defensive position than open ground, making forested regions useful for both industry and warfare. Clearing or transforming forest into Grassland can support growth later, but productive forest tiles—especially those containing Silk or Pheasant—are often worth preserving.

@@Hills
Hills are premier mining territory and strong defensive ground. A mined Hill becomes a major source of shields, making hilly city sites excellent industrial centers once workers have improved the surrounding land. Their high defensive value also makes Hills useful for forts, border positions, and controlling approaches to important cities.

@@Mountains
Mountains are difficult to cross but provide the strongest natural defensive terrain on land. Their ordinary economic yield is weak, but Gold and Iron can make individual mountain tiles extremely valuable. Mountains are ideal defensive anchors and natural barriers; controlling mountain passes can compensate for a smaller army by forcing an enemy to attack at a severe disadvantage.

@@Tundra
Tundra is marginal land, but it can support useful frontier settlements when strategically located or blessed with special resources. Irrigation improves its food supply, while Game and Furs can make northern territories surprisingly productive. Tundra cities are often valuable for claiming territory, controlling passages, and exploiting nearby resources rather than for raw early growth.

@@Glacier
Glacier is among the least productive terrain in its ordinary form. Its main value comes from special resources, strategic geography, and eventual transformation. Ivory can provide valuable trade, while Icy Oil supplies substantial production. A remote Glacier tile may therefore be economically worthwhile despite otherwise hostile surroundings.

@@Swamp
Swamp slows movement and provides moderate defensive cover, but its normal economic value is poor. Its special resources are much more attractive: Peat supplies excellent production while Spice combines food and trade. Transforming ordinary Swamp into Plains can dramatically improve a city’s long-term economy.

@@Jungle
Jungle is difficult frontier terrain with modest food output and useful defensive cover. Unimproved Jungle is rarely ideal for a city core, but Gems and Fruit can make individual tiles outstanding. Clearing or transforming Jungle can convert a difficult region into productive Plains once sufficient worker capacity is available.

@@Ocean
Ocean is the economic foundation of coastal cities. It naturally produces trade and can provide substantial food once a Harbor is built, while an Offshore Platform later adds shield production to worked sea tiles. Fish and Whales make coastal settlements even stronger. Ocean also forms the strategic highway for naval exploration, trade, amphibious warfare, and overseas conquest.

@@Oasis
An Oasis turns otherwise harsh Desert into an excellent food tile. Its three Food allow a desert city to grow rapidly without requiring immediate irrigation, while the additional Shield preserves some production. Oasis tiles are prime locations around which to establish settlements in arid regions.

@@Buffalo
Buffalo transforms ordinary Plains into a powerful early-production tile. The three Shields make it excellent for rapidly building settlers, military units, improvements, and Wonders while still contributing enough Food to support the citizen working it.

@@Resources
A Resources tile preserves Grassland’s strong two-Food output while adding a Shield. This makes it one of the most balanced early-game tiles: it supports population growth without sacrificing production and is especially valuable around a young capital.

@@Pheasant
Pheasant is an exceptionally strong Forest resource, combining three Food with two Shields. It supports rapid growth and industry simultaneously, making it one of the best all-around tiles available before major infrastructure is built.

@@Coal
Coal provides useful production on already defensible Hills. Once surrounding infrastructure is developed, Coal-rich regions become natural industrial centers and strategic objectives worth protecting from rivals.

@@Gold
Gold is one of the strongest commerce resources in the game. Although the tile feeds no population, its enormous six Trade can fuel taxes, science, or luxuries. A city able to support citizens working nearby Gold can gain a major technological or financial advantage.

@@Game
Game makes otherwise marginal Tundra highly livable. Three Food and a Shield can sustain frontier population growth and give northern cities a solid economic anchor, often turning territory that would otherwise be ignored into worthwhile settlement land.

@@Ivory
Ivory makes frozen territory economically significant. Its combination of Food, Shield, and four Trade gives a Glacier city a valuable high-commerce tile and can justify settlement in remote polar regions.

@@Peat
Peat is a major production resource. Four Shields make a Peat tile excellent for military production, infrastructure, and Wonders, particularly in cities that can obtain sufficient food from surrounding terrain to support the worker assigned to it.

@@Gems
Gems provide a powerful commerce source in otherwise difficult Jungle terrain. Four Trade can significantly accelerate research or increase tax income, making Gem-bearing Jungle an excellent reason to settle or retain territory that might otherwise be cleared.

@@Fish
Fish is one of the strongest resources for coastal growth. Three Food allows coastal cities to support larger populations while retaining Ocean’s valuable Trade output. With Harbor infrastructure, Fish tiles become even more important to maritime cities.

@@Oil
Oil turns Desert into a major production center. Four Shields make it ideal for industrial cities and military buildup, although the tile supplies no Food. Cities working Oil therefore benefit from nearby fertile terrain or strong food infrastructure.

@@Wheat
Wheat is an outstanding growth resource. It combines three Food with a Shield, allowing Plains cities to expand rapidly without becoming economically passive. Wheat is especially valuable in the early game when population growth determines how quickly a city can exploit surrounding tiles.

@@Bonus
Bonus Grassland emphasizes pure population support. Two Food provides a dependable foundation for growth and lets the city assign other citizens to Hills, Forests, Mountains, or special-resource tiles that would otherwise be difficult to sustain.

@@Silk
Silk combines respectable Forest production with three Trade, making it a valuable mixed economic tile. It is particularly useful for cities pursuing both industrial growth and rapid scientific or financial development.

@@Wine
Wine converts defensible Hills into an important commerce resource. Its four Trade can help fund research and taxation while the underlying Hill remains strategically valuable as high ground.

@@Iron
Iron makes Mountains a formidable production resource. Four Shields can support heavy military and industrial construction, and the Mountain’s strong defense makes Iron-rich territory naturally suited to fortified production centers and contested border regions.

@@Furs
Furs make northern territory both habitable and commercially valuable. Two Food supports the worker directly, while three Trade helps frontier cities contribute meaningfully to the civilization’s science and treasury.

@@Icy Oil
Icy Oil gives frozen wasteland major strategic value. Like Desert Oil, it produces four Shields but no Food. A well-supported polar city can use Icy Oil to become a surprisingly strong production center despite its hostile surroundings.

@@Spice
Spice is an exceptional economic resource, combining three Food with four Trade. It can sustain the citizen working it while producing substantial commerce, making Spice-bearing Swamp excellent territory to control even before the surrounding wetlands are transformed.

@@Fruit
Fruit is one of the strongest natural food resources in rhYciv. Four Food can drive explosive city growth and support citizens assigned to low-food production or trade tiles. Its extra Trade makes it even more useful to developing Jungle settlements.

@@Whales
Whales are a superb all-purpose maritime resource. They provide Food, production, and Trade simultaneously, giving coastal cities a balanced tile that helps them grow, build, and generate commerce at the same time. Harbor and Offshore Platform infrastructure can make Whales especially valuable in mature naval cities.

@@GOVERNMENT_INDEX
0,Anarchy
1,Despotism
2,Monarchy
3,Communism
4,Fundamentalism
5,Republic
6,Democracy
-2
@@Anarchy
Anarchy represents the temporary breakdown of organized government during a revolution. Cities suffer the same low-organization resource penalty as Despotism: a worked tile producing three or more Food, Shields, or Trade loses one point of that resource. Corruption and waste are severe, although cities can support a relatively large number of units without shield maintenance and military units stationed in a city can impose martial law. Anarchy's only real strategic benefit is that it is the bridge between governments. It is flexible enough to keep an empire functioning for a short period, but its weak economy makes ending the revolution and establishing a stable government a high priority.

@@Despotism
Despotism is the basic early-game government. Its great advantage is cheap military support: each city can support a number of ordinary units equal to its population before shield upkeep begins, and Settlers consume only one additional food. Up to three friendly combat units stationed in a city can also enforce martial law and reduce local unhappiness. The price is economic inefficiency. Any worked tile producing at least three Food, Shields, or Trade loses one point of that resource, and distance-based corruption and waste can be substantial. Despotism is excellent for surviving the opening turns, expanding quickly, and fielding an early army, but productive civilizations should usually replace it once a more advanced government becomes available.

@@Monarchy
Monarchy removes the harsh tile-production penalty of Despotism while retaining inexpensive Settlers and useful military support. Each city receives three free supported units, and up to three friendly combat units stationed in a city can reduce unhappiness through martial law. Cities therefore become noticeably more productive without forcing the player to abandon an expansionist or military strategy. Corruption and waste still increase with distance from the capital, but the economy is far healthier than under Despotism. Monarchy is one of the most dependable governments for the early and middle game: it offers a strong balance of growth, warfare, stability, and economic freedom without the military-happiness penalties of the representative governments.

@@Communism
Communism is designed for large, centralized empires. In rhYciv's current rules, distance from the capital does not create corruption or waste, so remote cities can remain productive even across a vast empire. Communism also avoids the additional empire-size unhappiness that can afflict other governments. Military control is exceptionally strong. Each city receives three free supported units, and martial law is twice as effective as under Despotism or Monarchy: each of up to three friendly combat units in a city can pacify two unhappy citizens. The trade-off is that Settlers consume two food, and Cathedrals are slightly less effective under Communist rule. Communism is particularly valuable to sprawling civilizations fighting on many fronts. It sacrifices the extra trade of Republic and Democracy, but provides excellent territorial efficiency, predictable city management, and strong domestic control.

@@Fundamentalism
Fundamentalism is the most aggressively military government in rhYciv. Unhappy and angry citizens are suppressed, eliminating ordinary civil disorder and allowing a civilization to wage prolonged wars without the domestic instability suffered by Republics and Democracies. Cities can support an enormous military - ten units per city before normal shield support begins - and Fanatics are intended to remain free of ordinary support costs. The cost is scientific progress. Fundamentalism sacrifices half of normal research output and also limits any one Tax, Luxury, or Science rate to 60 percent. Settlers consume two food, and the government does not receive the representative governments' trade bonus. Fundamentalism is therefore a powerful choice when the immediate objective is conquest. A technologically established civilization can switch to it, mobilize huge armies, and ignore most wartime unhappiness, but remaining Fundamentalist for too long can allow more research-focused rivals to pull ahead technologically.

@@Republic
The Republic is the first great economic government. Every worked tile that already produces Trade gains one additional Trade, dramatically increasing the raw commerce available for Taxes, Luxuries, and Science. The higher 80 percent rate ceiling lets the player concentrate that wealth where it is most useful, making Republic exceptionally strong for research, treasury growth, and peaceful development. That prosperity comes with military costs. Units receive no free shield support, Settlers consume two food, and martial law no longer works. Military units deployed away from friendly cities can also create unhappiness in their home cities. In rhYciv's current happiness rules, the first qualifying deployed unit supported by a Republican city is exempt from this field-unhappiness penalty, while additional deployed units normally create one unhappy citizen each. Police Stations and Women's Suffrage can reduce this burden. Republic is ideal when a civilization has enough infrastructure to pay for its military and wants to turn a strong trade network into rapid technological and economic growth. It rewards compact, prosperous empires and controlled wars rather than permanent mass mobilization.

@@Democracy
Democracy is rhYciv's most powerful pure economic government. Like Republic, it adds one Trade to every worked tile that already produces Trade, but its rate ceilings rise to 90 percent and the current rules eliminate distance-based corruption and waste entirely. This makes even remote cities economically useful and allows a mature civilization to convert an extraordinary share of its commerce into Science, Taxes, or Luxuries. Democracy also gives an additional happiness benefit in cities containing a Palace or Courthouse. Its weakness is warfare. There is no free unit support or martial law, Settlers require two food, and qualifying military units deployed in the field normally create two unhappy citizens in their home city. A Police Station or Women's Suffrage reduces that penalty by one citizen per deployed unit. For a peaceful or technologically dominant civilization, Democracy offers unmatched economic potential. It can finance enormous research programs and highly developed cities, but extended offensive wars require careful happiness management, strong infrastructure, or a deliberate switch to a more militaristic government.

@CONCEPT_DESCRIPTIONS
@@Roads
Roads create fast overland transport links and improve the economic value of suitable worked terrain. A connected road network lets armies reinforce fronts quickly, Settlers and Engineers move efficiently between projects, and cities function as a unified empire rather than isolated settlements.

@@Railroads
Railroads are the mature form of the land transportation network. They dramatically improve strategic mobility and increase the productive value of developed terrain. A dense rail network allows a civilization to shift military forces, workers, and economic activity across its territory with exceptional speed.

@@Irrigation
Irrigation increases Food production on terrain capable of supporting it. It is most valuable around growing cities and on tiles where an additional Food point allows the city to sustain workers assigned to high-production or high-trade terrain elsewhere.

@@Mines
Mines increase Shield production on compatible terrain. Hills are especially valuable mining targets because their large mining bonus can turn them into industrial powerhouses. Mining is central to cities specializing in military units, Wonders, and expensive late-game improvements.

@@Fortresses
Fortresses create prepared defensive positions outside cities. They are useful on borders, mountain passes, invasion routes, and strategic resources, allowing armies to hold key ground more efficiently and giving the player time to concentrate reinforcements.

@@Airbases
Airbases extend the operational reach of air power beyond city limits. They let aircraft operate from strategically chosen positions near fronts or remote regions and can turn otherwise empty territory into an important military staging area.

@@Pollution Cleanup
Industrial development can create pollution that damages the productivity and safety of surrounding terrain. Settlers and Engineers can clean polluted tiles, restoring their normal economic value and preventing environmental damage from undermining a highly developed empire.

@@Terrain Transformation
Advanced Engineers can reshape certain terrain into more useful forms. Transformation is a long-term strategic tool: poor terrain can be converted into land better suited for growth or production, while forests and other landscapes can be deliberately changed to fit a city’s economic role.

@@Choosing a Government
Anarchy is a temporary transitional state that you should leave as quickly as practical. Despotism offers strong early unit support but weak tile productivity and heavy corruption. Monarchy is a flexible all-purpose government for expansion and conventional warfare. Communism is excellent for large empires, distant cities, and sustained military control. Fundamentalism is best for massive war mobilisation and conquest, at the cost of research. Republic gives excellent trade and research with moderate wartime restrictions. Democracy offers maximum economic efficiency and research potential, but is the most demanding government for prolonged offensive war.
